I am Gojko Kotur, born in Kotrov, near Kozar, somewhere in the 1930s.
I don't know the exact date.
I was baptized in a monastery, all the books were burned, I lost everything, I have no one.
I don't know the exact date or year.
We had a lot of houses.
My mother was a leftist, my uncle was a priest, my uncle was a soldier, and my sister Anka.
Her name was Ana, but they renamed her after her.
Every evening, we had to pray to God.
We had to go to the corner, he went to the east.
and pray to God for that land.
We can't write when they pray to God.
I was baptized in a monastery.
My aunt told me that.
She was from Kolijevac.
We had a ox and three horses for the funeral.
But horses were faster than bulls.
We had a couple of cows, two calves, a lot of pigs, sheep.
We drove the pigs up to the forest, because there was fat, chestnut, everything.
My grandfather would take them up there, take them to the farm, make a pigsty, and bring them back every evening.
They would come to the same place and stay there.
My people were princes, and the princes were chosen by the rich.
We had a lot of things.
We had cars, planes, cruisers, and now there is the old one, the cruiser.
We lived, it was not luxurious, but we lived.
Nothing else.
You hear, Kozara was full of people before the war.
We lived off Kozara because we had cattle and we let them go.
As the spring comes, the wolves are released.
All the cows that don't graze are given to the forest.
We lived in Kozara.
My father was from Krčevo, my father was a soldier in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia.
My father came and disbanded the army.
It was 1941.
I found out that something was wrong.
I didn't know what was going to happen.
I wasn't a politician.
My father wasn't a politician either.
He was a peasant.
They were engaged in agriculture.
When the war started, the Ustashas immediately bombed the monastery three times.
When he came out, he was so old, he just bit his lip and killed him.
Here, up there, Mile, a guy from the Kutur, he was also in Krčevino, he worked up there.
They came and killed him right away.
There was a ration, they attacked from the top.
And then there was some Ana, a ration woman, I remember her a little.
When she started running,  They were killing us on the way.
There was a guy called Sekulic, he was still there.
They killed everyone.
We were mixed with Croats, they knew where we were.
They could not avoid us.
They were killing everyone.
I don't know if there is a village, but I know that there are 7-8 families that no one is left alive.
There is Kotura, Sekulic, Pajic, Kasolic, Savic, there are people like me in other places.
1942.
We could have stayed here from one dead body to another.
Cow, ox, man, pig.
It was so smelly.
Those were all Ustashas.
The Germans did kill a few, but not as many as the Ustashas.
The Ustashas killed, robbed and burned.
I experienced all of that, but it is impossible to describe what was done.
The Ustashas did whatever they could think of.
In 1940, when Pavelic allowed the Ustashas to go and slaughter, kill, then the people ran from Dubica to Kozara.
Kozara was full of people, cattle, they made a lot of food.
It was already June.
I was in the second partisan unit.
My uncle was in Medzivac, he was in charge of the planes, he was in charge of the food and tea.
I liked my uncle more than my father.
My mother went there to visit, we had a maternity home.
My uncle was an avionics guard and he was covered with birch branches.
Later, my uncle was told to be a gunner.
He was a gunner, but he was unlucky and he threw a grenade into the gunner.
I was in the hospital in Vitlovska.
My mother went to see him, I went too.
It was such a mess that one can't even imagine.
But, again, people lived in that barracks until the offensive started.
In 1942, the Prince's division was supposed to go to the Russian front, but Pavelic begged Hitler to let the division come and clean up the barracks from the partisans.
Before that, the Ustashas killed, robbed, they did everything.
They stabbed people, killed people, killed 15 people.
One survived.
One German came in with a gun.
He killed, killed, and when he ran out of bullets, he jumped over the bridge.
He was only left with his name and everything.
He was alive and saw everything that happened.
When we returned to Dozgo, we saw that everything was full of people.
But, it was not enough for Pavelic, because he was 100 km away from Zagreb.
They were going to Kozara and liberating Kokano, while the Ustashas were all behind, killing, robbing, etc.
Here in a village, in Vlaskovci, they were tying people with a wire around a haystack and burning it.
He stayed up there, but he had two brothers.
They went to the hospital and he told them to bring food to the pass.
They were already up there, on the hill, digging trenches.
The Germans came and said, go, go, go!
My other uncles, father and grandfather, they set up a fire to bake the lamb, but they didn't manage to bake it.
We had to go.
Then they gathered us.
All the columns went from the Ozgo to Dubica.
When we came down, the gypsies threw stones at us, spit on us, someone pulled someone to kill him.
They hit me and I hid behind a tree.
There was a field, people were pulling cattle, and I don't know what else.
We were on the field.
The next day, the order came, and they said, all men from 16 to 60 years old, should be ready to go to work in Germany.
My father went to the wagons, I know my father, he was there to wave to me and others.
He said, go to Germany to work.
The first station was Senovac.
They were all in a hurry, I never saw Senovac again, I didn't hear what happened to them.
They took us, our children, our wives, and everything else, and took us to the wagons to be taken to Croatia.
It was a beautiful day, but the situation was bad.
There were too many people, there was a national disease, there were children from a month old, maybe even from 15 days old.
One day, a group of people came and they were looking for a cheese maker.
There is one cheese maker station here.
They were looking for us.
Some people brought some flour and started to cook.
On the next day, we were walking to the Daraovar.
There were women who were carrying 4-5 children.
They were throwing them in the garbage.
When we arrived at Darovar, there was a steam mill.
We spent the night there.
It was raining, and the next day we went on foot again for Velika Zdenac.
The cars were waiting for us, they were taking us around the villages.
My family, my relatives, and some of my neighbors, were all eager to go to the Grubišno field.
We were sent to a village called Velika Peratovica, a Serbian village.
When we arrived, we were sent to a school, where there were domestic partisans.
They thought that we, Ercegovci, came to set up Serbian houses.
They wanted to beat us up.
Some people even proved that we were from Kozara.
Then, on the next day, a guard came and divided us into houses.
My mother was in one house, my grandmother in another.
I was given to a Serb, Dane Peulic.
I was good with them, they were Serbs.
I was there and I was sent to a pig farm to keep pigs.
It was August, the beginning of August.
My wife gave me the pig to keep, I went down to the yard, it was a little isolated house, two old people.
I kept the pig in the evening, they shot me in the eye, I was lying on the ground.
A cat came and kept peeing in my mouth, I took the cat and put it under my feet.
I woke up in the morning, the cat was dead.
I ran and came back to my warehouse.
It lasted for a month.
Then the offensive started, just like on Kozara.
We were running there too.
Partisans took over Virovitica.
My mother gave me pants without pockets.
When the offensive started, we ran to Bilogor.
There is a forest there.
They said, let's run there, they will kill us.
When the propaganda spread in Bilogor, they said that tomorrow planes will come to bomb Bilogor.
We went out of Bilogore to Kuruz, to Njive.
There was a small forest, there was a bush, a bush, and it grew around it.
There were two or three women with children.
There was me, my mother, my sister and my brother.
My mother, it was August, wanted to go and bring us water.
She went to bring water, but there was nothing.
My grandmother and I went to look for her, but there was nothing.
I heard when the gun shot.
The gun went off, but we didn't know anything about it.
The next day, a shooting machine came.
They were shouting, Orvec, Orvec, and I don't know what it was.
He didn't see us, we were in a good mood.
He started crying.
He asked who was in the pit.
He said it was a woman and a boy.
They hid from artillery.
He said, come out.
One of them asked who was there.
He said it was the one who killed us.
He said, women and children, throw the bomb, kill them.
They said, let them go, they are already in the hell.
Now, there are a lot of us, they are gathering from all sides, in one house, on one hill.
It is like a private camp.
I thought my mother was there, but she is not.
We were there for 4 days, and there were a lot of women from here.
We were looking for Kuruzis.
My aunt was with me, we were looking for them, even though Bosanka was not there.
I found my mother dead.
Her head was bleeding, her head was red from the head.
They were beating her.
When she fell on her back, she knew where she hit.
She was looking for a dead body.
Later, a young woman came and started to complain.
I only knew what happened on the 45th.
The dogs came and dug up the place.
I will tell you later.
I went and found my mother and her children.
They started to kill us with their weapons.
There was a full church, but when they started to kill us, only one corner was left.
But the Ustashas were there, I know one woman from here, she was carrying a rifle, I saw her in Vinograd, the partisan was shooting from there, and the other one was here.
They are calculated now, but that's how they trapped us later.
If they kill us, the night is already preparing, then they can't go to the Grubišno field, which is 9 km away.
They would come out if they would kill us.
They would push us out of the field.
I would come at night to my mother's house, I had some shoes, I cut them.
They would beat us with those sticks.
If someone would fall, they would not lift him up.
When we arrived in Grubišno, we waited for the Ustashas.
Then they picked us up, the children and all.
They didn't ask how old we were.
They just wanted to see if we grew up a bit.
Before that, they were taking my grandfather away while he was in Peratovice.
He told me that one of the people who ran away from Senovac came to visit.
I forgot that.
My neighbor Vustasa came and I had my brother-in-law, Milovan Kotur and me.
My grandmother and his mother covered us a bit so that they would not see us.
We were in Mrscevo.
The Ustashas came to take us away.
They took everything from us, even if we had a needle.
We were there for about three days.
Then the composition came again, and they beat us all.
There were women, children, women, everything.
For three days we went to Jesenovac.
They had to let the army through, so they had to stop at every station.
We traveled for three days, there was no water, no food, nothing.
We came to Jesenovac, the composition was stopped, and the composer said that there was no more pomade.
It was a sign that there was no more space.
There was no more space in Jesenovac.
But they still kept us there for two days.
Wives, children, old women, it all stinks and no one opens the stall.
One night, before night, the composition starts and we go on.
I look at the bonfire, I think that the monk is here.
We came to Sisak, and we were put on an open rail.
There was no station, nothing.
They picked us up and said, let's go to Shisanje.
Old women were saying, Shisanje, come on Igor, everything is fine for us, it was not important for the children.
They were trying to scare us, telling us to leave our stuff there, to burn it.
We couldn't find our stuff, and the next day we found it.
I think that about 7000 children passed through there.
At least one of them wrote to me about that.
And then we stayed in the camp.
There was a lot of garbage, but there was a lot of mud and glass mixed with that.
and give them some soups made of wheat flour.
Women were separated, they had a camp, others.
We had only barracks, and there were children and slums.
I don't know, maybe a month or so.
But it was not even 12 years old.
Every day they would let the women to bring the children.
In the morning, when the gate was opened, they would fly and ask for their children.
Some died, some survived.
In the afternoon and in the evening.
There was a man next to me, he was lying next to me, you could feel that he was cold.
He was a man, he was a Slavonian, he was a bit of a Zepas.
One morning, when he died,  You don't have to die, they come every morning with a dead horse.
But it wasn't a dead horse, it was a platoon.
And then, whoever dies, they throw something up and wipe it.
And there was already a dug hole, and they threw a lot of gravel, water and so on.
I thought that was the end.
I was so happy.
I thought that I didn't have to die, but if I saw that horse, I would have to suffer.
My sister was with me.
She was younger, she was getting better, but I had to get up earlier every morning.
I didn't know what time it was.
They were coming at 8 o'clock.
I had to take her to the barrack to be guarded.
She was looking for dead people.
When she came there, I told her to do what she had to do.
I saved her from being wiped out.
One day, a man came to the house.
He said, here is your bag, take it, it is dirty.
Here is your gun.
He said, take it, tomorrow they will bring you a crow.
The next day, he came.
We threw the bag over the barbed wire, he came to shoot him.
Then my cousin Milovan and I started to move from the village of Zica to Njiva.
It was already autumn.
If you find half a tomato, half a pepper, half a tomato, it's good for us.
When the children heard that we were going, they followed us.
We were going at night.
There was a barrack, it was bright inside.
I didn't know what was a trap, I didn't know what was a cycle or a chain.
But I don't suffer from the pain of the core.
When I suffered from the pain of the core, Milo and I, the dog was on our side, I took it and let it go.
We were not allowed to go out.
We had a big loaf of bread.
How did she manage to do it?
I don't know.
We just tore it apart.
We started to die one after another.
Some died because of illness, others because of the barracks.
Today, women are allowed to give their children to the machine, but they had nothing.
And the time comes, when women who have children and children who are mothers, say, let them come to the abandoned house, we will let them go home.
I could have gone home, but I didn't know where I was.
My sister does not have a mother, and there was a Mikan Misirac and his sister, they took us in their aunts.
They took us in their aunts as their children.
They did not have children, so they took us in their aunts.
One of the women, a Serbian woman, when she came to the cemetery, she said that those were not her children, so she took them back.
She said that when they were given to the Shamas, they should return to their camp.
The ones who were there left us alone.
We continued our journey.
There are a lot of children.
I was passing by the river, and I saw a group of children playing.
I told them to go to the river, but they didn't listen to me.
They were playing football, and we were passing by the river.
You can't go there, you can only see that there are orphans there.
We see an orphan there, we go there, and there is a carpenter who makes carpets.
He is a carpenter, he sits and makes them.
He says, children, are you hungry?
We are.
You say, we are hungry.
My son, I don't have anything, give us one baked potato.
He immediately told me to go to the butcher and he said that he might give me something.
If he was alive, I would dedicate the potato to him.
I went to the butcher, I had to go to the stairs, but it was a good building, almost new.
I thought if I go or not, they can kill me, but I will go up there.
She said that you are from the camp.
She gave me a bag of string.
I said to her to run to the camp.
I went back to the camp.
We were taken several times.
One day, my cousin, Mikan, was there.
He had a sister, and I had a sister, and so we stayed.
It was October, maybe later.
Some women came and started to show us mercy.
I saw there that there was a fire going on, cooking something.
They said, children, how can you eat, you are hungry.
They said, don't be afraid, we will give you food.
They were cooking potato and tempan.
It was Caritas or Red Cross, I don't know.
There was one woman who was saving many children.
They were giving us potato and tempan.
We ate as much as we could.
Some of us even died.
They took us to the van and asked us to sing.
We were lucky to get to Zagreb.
I ate sweet pasta for the first time.
The doctors came and looked at us.
They said who died, who didn't, and now he is in Zagreb.
We were in Zagreb.
There were barracks behind us.
They were dragging us into those barracks.
We were in Krajevo, in barracks.
I was going out and looking around.
We were free kids, we had some sisters, red crosses, I think they accepted us.
They gave us some food.
One of the women, a woman from Sešir, asked me who had a brother and sister.
I said I did.
She asked if I would go to her house.
I said no.
She said she would go to the Red Cross to ask if they could take her.
I said I had relatives.
She said she could take me.
I need a boy.
Mikan.
I continue the next day, when the lady comes and says, they have approved my taking you away.
My relative.
I didn't see any injuries on the first time we went in.
The people were dirty, dirty.
I asked the owner of the house, Mr.
Koso, what happened to them.
He explained everything.
I can't say anything, it was a good people.
They were really good people.
Then, when Gundulic came, number 25, they had a big house, a garage, they were rich, it was rich in Brazil.
The hostess asked us to take off our clothes, take a bath, take our pyjamas.
The doctor came to us and said that we have to give them an apple every day, they have to eat it.
The hostess gave us only a few biscuits.
She said that she would give us food, but she couldn't because we hadn't eaten for a long time.
My stomach was already stuck to my chest.
I really can't tell them anything.
He went to the place where he was looking for a job.
He went there and got a job as a butcher.
He was hired by Zizanteri.
He was sent to Zagreb, and then another one came and took him.
I didn't know anything about this.
My sister got a job as a butcher.
She went to Zagreb, but there was no medicine for TBC.
She kept it in plaster.
One day, a man came to me and said that he had to cut her leg.
I said, what do you want me to do?
He said he would try.
He said there was a man who went to the sea to get the queen.
They could have cured TB, C, bone with the help of sun.
She tried it.
There were many steps, everything was destroyed.
You had to walk to get there.
The man took her there.
It was the end of 1943.
We didn't hear or see each other.
I was alone.
I took the other one with me.
We have a property in Svetivan Zelna, 30 km from Varazdin.
We had horses, cows, we had a brickyard, a steam mill, a power plant.
We had everything.
It was rich.
How could it not be rich if he could support a man, if he needed a job, and he got a call to join the army.
There was no sausage, nothing.
They got rich and later on they got rich.
They moved me there.
I didn't do much there, but I was happy.
I had my own room.
There were some bunkers there, which guarded the city.
I said, fuck it, I'll bury him, dry him, save him, and bring him to Gazdarica.
I found him there, one of them asked me, where are you from?
I said, I'm from Banja Luka, Ustasha.
I said, fuck it.
So, I went to take him when I had to.
Now, Gazdarica says, Vojko, years pass.
He said, you should go to school.
I was furious.
He wrote to me and told me to go to school.
I went to school and when they found out who I was, they took me to the one with the cow.
Partisan, partisan, partisan.
There was a big fair where they sold the stones and beat up the peasants.
Now I am not allowed to go to school.
The host said, this is the Ustasha, they can kill you when they want.
If they find out where you are from, what will they say?
I didn't even call the host.
I said, fuck it, people are not educated, there is nothing like that.
He said, Gojko, you have to go to church, at least they will see you there.
I said, nothing, I am going to church, this is not the same.
I knew that this was not the way, better than ours.
I did not know, I did not know.
Now we are learning.
I went to church and I was peaceful.
The chief of the police, we know about 5 languages, and the chief of the police, we knew a lot.
He had a big radio, he called me and I was listening to him in English.
It was already the beginning of 1944, he said that the Partisans will win.
He helped the Partisans, he was not a bad man.
So I stayed with him.
My sister, she was cured in Kraljevica.
She knew that my aunt was wounded.
She was dying of hunger.
She knew her name was Ana.
She knew that we were from Kotrov, from the village.
She wrote a letter to Kotrov, Bosnian Dubica, Ana Kotur.
When the letter arrived, it was sent to God knows who.
My other aunt opened the letter and saw who it was.
She saw where I was.
I didn't care about her anymore.
I lost everything.
She went to the Red Cross and asked for my passport.
Moraška Gojković came to me.
I was already 45 years old.
I was released.
I said I wouldn't go, but I was Moraška.
They pressed me and I went.
Then I came to Partizan.
There was nothing to eat.
I was hungry.
I was happy in the spring when there is a thaw, otherwise I have nothing in winter.
But when I came here, my house was left empty.
But the neighbors cleaned everything, removed windows, ceilings, floor, because there was a house on the basement.
I lived like that with my aunt, I suffered, I don't know how I survived.
There is nothing to eat, nothing to wear.
I repented later, but maybe it would be better.
If I had known who I was, what I was, where I came from, they would have killed me in this war.
I was happy to come here.
I lived with my aunt.
There were some farm workshops, a collective farm.
We had to go there to work.
There were about 70 of us.
I don't know what year it was.
We all signed up for the 30th anniversary.
I thought I would go to the army to get food.
Milovan and Branko, two brothers, not twins, both were leading the 30th anniversary.
I gave 30, 31, 22, whatever I could.
I didn't touch it.
I got some support, but it was nothing.
But when you have nothing, you have some people who fixed my house.
But I don't live alone.
I lived with my aunt.
I joined the army, I was in the army for two and a half years.
I was in the infantry school for three years.
But, due to the shortening of the term, they took away our military cards for six months.
I didn't have any privileges.
My mother, grandmother, uncle, aunt, I don't know anyone for the grave.
And then my sister, when she was released, she came here.
So the two of us lived together with my aunt.
We got married.
I knew that my mother was dead, so I went with my aunt and found her dead on the fourth day.
His head was red, he was lying in the bushes.
I knew where it was, so I took my aunt and we went there.
We had free transportation, it was 1945.
We went to Veliko Peratovica, where we were already, where my mother died.
We came there and found a man whose nest was there.
I knew where that nest was.
He took us there and said, there is nothing there.
He said that dogs dug it out and pulled it out.
I found a piece of a river that my mother carried.
It was once a swamp.
On the threshold.
There is nothing there.
I was looking for a place in Zagreb, because it was all written down, what was done, for a camp.
When we were in Dječje, there was nothing.
I threw away the paper, I can't find it now.
I'm sorry that I lost it, but it's not lost.
After the war, we were thrown into the same pit as the Croats.
They were immediately cut, they had to pay.
We were not allowed to go to the church, but we were allowed to go to the monastery.
They reported us after the war, so they were based here in Kolkovo.
We went to the tavern to eat.
There were some brigades.
I don't know, this people is so well-educated.
We are to blame.
He was a very honorable man, he was a Bosko Slijegovic, he was a national hero.
He was a national hero, he was a national hero.
He was a national hero.
We were 45 people, we had a lot of work to do.
We had a farm, we had a kolkhoz.
My father was taken from Karachi and they built a house for me.
I was taken away from there before the war.
They were always connected to me.
They took it away from me.
My Serbs were fighters from the first day.
Muslims and Croats were fighting and schooling each other.
After the war, they got a job in the municipality and they started to command again.
They were not literate.
The Muslims came and took away my church.
They were given a place to build a mosque.
We were in a jam.
When they saw that the Partisans were going to win, they came to the Partisans.
Our guys were already dead.
I had a brother in my aunt's family.
I was living in a bunker.
I was not like him.
I don't know how I survived.
I was hungry more when I was younger than now.
I believe in fate.
I don't believe in anything else.
I believe in fate.
When a man is born, he is already programmed where he should go, where he should come, where he should stop, where he should end up.
I only believe in that.
I was there on Kozara, and everything was shot at.
Bombs, all the bombs.
I think that nothing like this has ever happened on Kozara.
I don't know how they survived.
When I was on Kozara, I was carrying bread to the partisans.
I was hit by a machine gun, I was lying under a bush, I was bleeding.
You know, you need to be lucky in life.
You need to be happy to not get hurt.
I dreamed that the Ustasha killed me.
He was dreaming.
I know exactly, there is a trace.
He killed me, he heard me when he was knocking and killed me.
I thought to myself, death is good, we know everything about ourselves.